Create documentation for connecting Astro to external data services (#480)
astronomer/docs: astro/connect-to-external-services.md

---
sidebar_label: "Connect to External Services"
title: "Connect Astro to External Data Services"

> id: connect-to-external-services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
id: connect-external-services
```

> description: Learn how to connect Astro to different types of external data services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn how to connect your Astro Data Plane to different types of external data services.
```

---

## Overview

> Before you can run pipelines on Astro with real data, you first need to make this data accessible to the Data Plane. This guide explains how to connect your Astro Clusters to external data sources using the following methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you can run pipelines on Astro with real data, you first need to make this data accessible to the Data Plane. This guide explains how to connect your Astro Clusters to external data services using the following methods:
```

- Public Endpoints
- VPC Peering

> If you need to connect to a different type of data source than the ones documented here, reach out to [Astronomer support](https://support.astronomer.io).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to connect to a different type of data service or source than the ones documented here, reach out to [Astronomer support](https://support.astronomer.io).
```

## Public Endpoints

> The fastest and easiest way to connect Astro to an external data source is by using the data source's publicly accessible endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fastest and easiest way to connect Astro to an external data service is by using the data service's publicly accessible endpoints.
```

These endpoints can be configured by:

> - Setting [Environment Variables](environment-variables.md) with your endpoint information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Setting [environment variables](environment-variables.md) on Astro with your endpoint information.
```

> - Creating an [Airflow Connection](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/howto/connection.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Creating an [Airflow Connection](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/howto/connection.html) with your endpoint information.
```

> Public connection traffic moves directly between your Data Plane and the external data source's API endpoint, meaning that the data in this traffic never reaches the Control Plane, which is managed by Astronomer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Public connection traffic moves directly between your Data Plane and the external data service's API endpoint. This means that the data in this traffic never reaches the Control Plane, which is managed by Astronomer.
```

### IP Allowlist

> Some data services, such as Snowflake and Databricks, provide an additional layer of security by requiring you to allowlist a specific IP address before you can access the service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some data services, including Snowflake and Databricks, provide an additional layer of security by requiring you to allowlist a specific IP address before you can access the service.
```

> Each Cluster has a pair of unique external IP address that will persist throughout the lifetime of the Cluster. These IP addresses are assigned for network address translation, meaning that they're responsible for all outbound traffic from your Cluster to the internet. To retrieve an IP for a given Cluster, open a ticket with [Astronomer support](https://support.astronomer.io) and request it. If you have more than one Cluster, you will need to allowlist each Cluster individually on your data service provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Astro, each Cluster has a pair of unique external IP address that will persist throughout the lifetime of the Cluster. These IP addresses are assigned for network address translation, which means that they are responsible for all outbound traffic from your Astro Cluster to the internet. To retrieve an IP for a given Cluster, open a ticket with [Astronomer support](https://support.astronomer.io) and request it. If you have more than one Cluster, you will need to allowlist each Cluster individually on your data service provider.
```

## VPC Peering

> Each Cluster runs in a dedicated VPC. To set up private connectivity between an Astro VPC and another VPC, you can set up a VPC peering connection. Peered VPCs provide additional security by ensuring private connectivity, reduced network transit costs, and simplified network layouts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Cluster on Astro runs in a dedicated VPC. To set up private connectivity between an Astro VPC and another VPC, you can set up a VPC peering connection. Peered VPCs provide additional security by ensuring private connectivity, reduced network transit costs, and simplified network layouts.
```

> To create a VPC peering connection between a Cluster's VPC and a target VPC, reach out to [Astronomer support](https://support.astronomer.io) and provide the following information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a VPC peering connection between an Astro Cluster's VPC and a target VPC, reach out to [Astronomer support](https://support.astronomer.io) and provide the following information:
```

- Name of your Cluster
- AWS Account ID for the target VPC
- AWS Region for the target VPC
- VPC ID of the target VPC
- CIDR of the target VPC

> In response, Astronomer will initiate a peering request. To connect successfully, this peering request must be accepted by the owner of the target VPC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From there, Astronomer will initiate a peering request. To connect successfully, this peering request must be accepted by the owner of the target VPC.
```

> Once peering is set up, continue to work with Astronomer Support and the owner of the target VPC to update the routing tables of both VPCs to direct traffic to each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once peering is set up, the owner of the target VPC can expect to continue to work with our team to update the routing tables of both VPCs to direct traffic to each other.
```
